---
layout: post
title:  "Case Study: first sale & fair use"
date:   2019-04-27
categories: law
---
*What follows is an adapted version fghjfhgfasdKJASK NASD 
Reference is to a hypothetical situation in which a 501(3)c
not-for-profit corporation seeks information as to whether or not it may
procure MLB, NFL, or other major sporting organization-branded material
and make, manufacture, distribute, or sell derivative works or goods
using the licensed, copyrighted, or trademarked material as raw stock
for its goods. This memorandum seeks to provide information, for
educational purposes only, regarding the legal issues pertaining to such
activities.

A detailed survey has not been completed at this time. The information
presented in this memorandum constitutes the product of research using
publicly-available information obtained so far from knowledgeable and
responsible sources and makes this summary reply possible.

The following conclusions can be reported:

-   A United States Supreme Court decision in 2013 reaffirmed the first
    sale doctrine, under which it is generally possible to purchase
    copyrighted or trademarked material and resell it to other persons.
    This case is discussed in more detail below.

-   There exist licensure and/or permission requirements for certain
    parties wishing to purchase and resell copyrighted or trademarked
    material.

-   Broadly speaking, it is not legal for a person to manufacture or
    otherwise make and subsequently sell derivative works using
    copyrighted or trademarked material without the permission of the
    rights holder. Exceptions do exist.

-   Procuring licensed, copyrighted, or trademarked raw material and
    making, manufacturing, distributing, or selling derivative works
    made from the source material will almost certainly rely on a“fair
    use” defense in order to assert legality.

As for specific questions surrounding this matter, the following brief
answers develop from the studies made during the past few days. These
conclusions are subject to expansion and more detailed examination
should the survey be authorized to continue.

Overview of Copyright {#overview-of-copyright .unnumbered}
=====================

Copyrights are a basket of rights that create a legal monopoly on the
rights to sell, reproduce, and distribute a given work product. If one
wishes to sell goods or material in which the copyright is held by
another person or to sell a *de novo* work product that incorporates or
derives from such goods or material, two approaches are available. One
may make use of exceptions in the copyright laws or one may obtain
authorization from the holder of the copyrights.

First Sale Doctrine {#first-sale-doctrine .unnumbered}
===================

The first sale doctrine, which is codified at 17 USC ∗ 109, [^1] is a
statutory restriction that Congress has placed on the rights of
copyright owners. It says that a person who purchases a piece or copy of
copyrighted material or goods from the legal holder of the copyright
then obtains the right to sell, display, or otherwise dispose of that
particular copy. [^2] Distribution rights end, however, once the owner
(purchaser) sells that particular copy. The first sale doctrine does not
offer protections for purchasers who make unauthorized reproductions of
a copyrighted work.

The matter of first sale doctrine creates much confusion among copyright
holders, purchasers, and prosecutors. In cases that do not involve
reproduction of copyrighted materials, it is possible for
purchasers/resellers to resist prosecution by making the claim that they
reasonably believed that the goods they were selling had previously been
subject to a legitimate first sale. Additionally, several criminal
convictions related to copyrighted materials have been overturned owing
to deficits in the prosecution’s proof of the first sale.

The Owner’s Right Initiative, an organization composed of individuals,
businesses, and associations that seeks to protect ownership rights in
the United States, distill the first sale doctrine down to their slogan,
“You bought. You own it. You have a right to resell it.” [^3] [^4] It is
on this basis that individuals may purchase MLB or NFL branded items and
resell them on eBay.

First Sale Doctrine in the Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons Supreme Court Case {#first-sale-doctrine-in-the-kirtsaeng-v.-john-wiley-sons-supreme-court-case .unnumbered}
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The United States Supreme Court decided a case in 2013 [^5] [^6] that
reaffirmed the doctrine of first sale.

A Thai graduate student was accused of infringing the copyrights of
academic publisher John Wiley & Sons because he made legitimate
purchases of Wiley textbooks in Thailand, where they were cheaper,
imported them into the United States, and sold them online to US buyers.
Wiley claimed that the sales were unauthorized. Kirtsaeng claimed that
he had the right to sell the books because they were lawfully purchased
in the first place.

Lower courts ruled against Kirtsaeng on the basis that, because the
books were manufactured in a foreign country, he had violated the
copyright laws in the United States by conducting unauthorized sales.
The Supreme Court held that the relevant language in 17 USC ∗ 109 does
not have a geographical orientation and that first sales abroad are
protected by the doctrine. While this case was primarily focused on
foreign purchases and subsequent importation, [^7] Justice Breyer,
writing for the majority, further affirmed the first sale doctrine by
stating that “reliance on the ‘first sale’ doctrine is also deeply
embedded in the practices of booksellers, libraries, museums, and
retailers, who have long relied on its protection.” [^8]

Worldwide Exhaustion in the US {#worldwide-exhaustion-in-the-us .unnumbered}
==============================

The Kirtsaeng case explicitly secured the rights of purchasers to trade
in imported materials. This is a notion known as worldwide exhaustion.
After an item has undergone a legitimate first sale and is imported into
the United States, the rights of the copyright holder are eliminated.
[^9]

Nature of Exhaustion in the European Union {#nature-of-exhaustion-in-the-european-union .unnumbered}
------------------------------------------

While the exhaustion principle applies to sales into the United States,
the European Union does not recognize this doctrine. Attempts to sell a
copyrighted or trademarked good *into* the EU require explicit
permission or license from the holder of the copyrights. By contrast,
under a doctrine known as regional exhaustion, copyrighted or
trademarked goods sold *within* the EU between member countries do not
require these permissions.

Is Permission Required to Sell Copyrighted Sports Team Material at Retail? {#is-permission-required-to-sell-copyrighted-sports-team-material-at-retail .unnumbered}
==========================================================================

It is not necessary to obtain permission or a license to sell
MLB/NFL/etc. goods at retail. This is true whether the seller operates a
brick-and-mortar physical location, sells online, or both. It *is*
necessary, however, to purchase the goods from MLB/NFL/etc. authorized
licensees or distributors. [^10]

Locating Authorized Sellers {#locating-authorized-sellers .unnumbered}
===========================

A directory of 1500+ licensees authorized to sell material featuring the
copyrighted or trademarked material of major sporting teams and
organizations can be found at:\
`http://www.licensedsports.net/`

Is a License Needed to Manufacture and Sell Products with Copyrighted or Trademarked Material to Retailers, Wholesalers, Distributors, etc.? {#is-a-license-needed-to-manufacture-and-sell-products-with-copyrighted-or-trademarked-material-to-retailers-wholesalers-distributors-etc. .unnumbered}
============================================================================================================================================

While is not necessary to obtain a license, permission, or to pay
royalties on the sale of goods purchased from a licensee, it is
necessary to obtain permission and/or pay royalties if the individual or
business intends to make or manufacture new goods featuring copyrighted
or trademarked logos/material. [^11]

Fair Use {#fair-use .unnumbered}
========

As mentioned above, copyrights grant creators certain rights relating to
their work. They may exclusively reproduce their material, create
derivatives of that material, and display the work publicly. [^12] [^13]
These rights are not absolute, however. Important exceptions are
included in the doctrine of fair use. It should be noted that “fair use”
is a defense that can be used to avoid prosecution for copyright
infringement—it is not a codified rule but rather a series of tests that
courts use to determine whether or not a particular use case falls under
the fair use doctrine. [^14]

In the hypothetical case being treated here, a not-for-profit
organization intends to purchase MLB/NFL/etc. licensed goods from an
authorized licensee and then use those goods as raw material to produce
products *de novo* that feature the copyrighted or trademarked material
in some way. The legality of the re-manufacturing or repurposing of
copyrighted material will depend largely on whether such activity can
successfully be established as fair use.

If the use can be determined to be fair, the copyrighted or trademarked
materials may be used without the need for obtaining permission from the
rights holder. Analysis of fair use cases is done based on four factors,
each of which receive equal weight: [^15]

-   The intended character and purpose of the use;

-   the nature of the work being copied or derived from;

-   the amount and substance of the use; and

-   the effect that the use has on the original work’s value.

The objective in determining fair use is to strike a balance between the
rights holder and the rights of the public. Fair use is technologically
agnostic and therefore the same test can be applied to any medium.

It is critical that the test in Table [tab:fair-use-test] be
well-understood and applied carefully. In the event that a rights holder
files suit claiming that their rights have been infringed upon, it is
possible for a court to reduce or eliminate the amount of damages
claimed if the alleged infringing party is able to demonstrate that they
performed and understood their own analysis of the test and arrived at a
good faith conclusion that their activity qualifies as fair.

[^16]

<span>|X|c|c|c|c|</span> & Purpose of Use & Nature of Work & Quantity
Used & Market Effect\
Fair Use & Nonprofit & Fact & Small Amount & No Effect\
& Educational & Published & & Licensing Not Avail.\
& Personal & & & Permission Not Avail.\
& Teaching & & &\
& Criticism & & &\
& Commentary & & &\
& Scholarship & & &\
& Research & & &\
& News Reporting & & &\
Permission & Commercial & Creative & Large Amount & Major Effect\
& For Profit & Unpublished & Heart of the Work & Available to the world\
& Entertainment & & &\

[tab:fair-use-test]

When applying the fair use test, the more factors that favor fair use
for the intended use, the better off the case is.

-   One factor (a single column in Table [tab:fair-use-test]) in favor
    of fair use fails the test and would require permission;

-   two factors is a tie and it is up the user to assess the risk;

-   three factors would indicate that the intended use is more than
    likely fair use; and

-   satisfying all four factors would constitute fair use.

Copyfraud {#copyfraud .unnumbered}
=========

Copyfraud constitutes false or inappropriate allegations of copyright
infringement. Works in the public domain, such as William Shakespeare’s
plays, Monet’s paintings, etc., are frequently subject to false claims
of infringement by the archives, libraries, and museums that own them.
Some unknowing people and businesses, faced with a strongly-worded
letter threatening litigation and steep fines, will end up obtaining
licenses and/or paying fees to use or reproduce works that are, in fact,
free for everyone to use.

The very nature of the copyright laws creates the incentive to
perpetuate copyfraud. There are no civil penalties imposed on a party
for falsely claiming ownership of material that is in the public domain.
Users who do end up ceasing their activity or paying fees for permission
also have no remedy under the current copyright laws. Falsely claiming
copyright is technically a criminal act, but prosecutions of these types
of cases is very rare. [^17]

Disclaimer; Limitation of Liability {#disclaimer-limitation-of-liability .unnumbered}
===================================

*It should be noted that the author is not an attorney and this document
was compiled as a result of research efforts. Nothing contained herein
may be construed as legal advice or a legal opinion. The author cannot
guarantee that this work is free from errors and therefore cannot be
held liable for any damages, lost profits, or increased operating
expenses resulting from any action taken, or not taken, on the basis of
the contents of this memorandum.*

[^1]: 17 US Code ∗ 109 - Limitations on exclusive rights: Effect of
    transfer of particular copy or phonorecord Retrieved from
    <https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/17/109>.

[^2]: United States Department of Justice, *Criminal Resource Manual* ∗
    1854 Copyright Infringement – First Sale Doctrine. Retrieved from
    <span><https://www.justice.gov/usam/criminal-resource-manual-1854-copyright-infringement-first-sale-doctrine></span>.

[^3]: Owner’s Rights Initiative. *Our Issues.* Retrieved from
    <http://www.ownersrightsinitiative.org/background/>.

[^4]: Anita Campbell. *Supreme Court: You Bought It, You Own It, You Can
    Resell It.* Retrieved from
    <https://smallbiztrends.com/2013/03/resale-rights-you-bought-own.html>.

[^5]: The Supreme Court of the United States. *Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley &
    Sons, Inc., 568 U.S. 519* (2013). Retrieved from
    [https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/12pdf/11-697~4~g15.pd](https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/12pdf/11-697_4g15.pd).

[^6]: Justia. *Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 568 U.S. \_\_\_
    (2013)* Retrieved from
    <https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/568/11-697/>.

[^7]: Daniel Fisher. *Supreme Court Upholds Right to Sell
    Foreign-Published Books.* Retrieved from
    <https://www.forbes.com/sites/danielfisher/2013/03/19/supreme-court-upholds-right-to-sell-foreign-published-books/#791960e52ef6>

[^8]: The Supreme Court of the United States. *Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley &
    Sons, Inc., 568 U.S. 519* (2013). Retrieved from
    [https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/12pdf/11-697~4~g15.pd](https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/12pdf/11-697_4g15.pd).

[^9]: Owner’s Rights Initiative. *Our Issues.* Retrieved from
    <http://www.ownersrightsinitiative.org/background/>.

[^10]: Scott Silcox. *Does a Retailer need an NFL (or MLB or NBA or NHL
    or NCAA) license to sell licensed sports products from my bricks and
    mortar store and/or over the internet?* Retrieved from
    <http://licensedsports.blogspot.com/2012/03/does-retailer-need-nfl-or-mlb-or-nba-or.html>

[^11]: Scott Silcox. *Does a Retailer need an NFL (or MLB or NBA or NHL
    or NCAA) license to sell licensed sports products from my bricks and
    mortar store and/or over the internet?* Retrieved from
    <http://licensedsports.blogspot.com/2012/03/does-retailer-need-nfl-or-mlb-or-nba-or.html>

[^12]: 17 US Code ∗ 106 - Exclusive rights in copyrighted works.
    Retrieved from <https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/17/106>.

[^13]: Brian Farkas. *The ‘Fair Use’ Rule: When Use of Copyrighted
    Material Is Acceptable.* Retrieved from
    <https://www.nolo.com/legal-encyclopedia/fair-use-rule-copyright-material-30100.html>.
    **Note:** Fair Use is not a “rule,” it is a defense that can be used
    in the event that a party is allegedly infringing copyrights.

[^14]: Adria Sacarino. *How NOT to Break the Law While Marketing.*
    Retrieved from:
    <https://blog.kissmetrics.com/break-the-law-marketing/>

[^15]: Adria Sacarino. *How NOT to Break the Law While Marketing.*
    Retrieved from:
    <https://blog.kissmetrics.com/break-the-law-marketing/>.

[^16]: Purdue University Copyright Office. *Copyright Exceptions: Fair
    Use.* Retrieved from
    [https://www.lib.purdue.edu/uco/CopyrightBasics/fair~u~se.html](https://www.lib.purdue.edu/uco/CopyrightBasics/fair_use.html)

[^17]: Jason Mazzone. *CopyFraud*. Retrieved from
    <http://www.nyulawreview.org/issues/volume-81-number-3/copyfraud>.
